---
title: Bargaining Power in Networks
---

# Markets

In sociology, the notion of power is a central issue.
In the presence of a social network, one may ask
whether an individual's power is primarily
derived from the individual's exceptional attributes,
or whether it is based on the individual's pivotal
position in the network.

Here we develop two mathematical notions, stability
and balance, that allow us to
quantify power in network structures.

## Network Exchange under Controlled Conditions

The vague idea of power in a network can be made precise in
the form of the following experiment.

People are place on the nodes of a small graph, representing a social
network.  Each edge of the graph carries a "social value" of, say,
&euro;1 and the nodes joned by that edge can negotiate over how that
money is to be divided between them.
After a certain time limit agreements must have been reached.
Under the **one-exchange rule**, each node can only  be involved in
a successful exchange with at most one neighbor.
Hence, a node stops negotiating once an agreement on
how to split the euro has been reach with one of its neighbours.

Such an experiment can be run with real people, on different
graphs, and for multiple rounds.  We seek a theoretical framework
that predicts the outcome of such negotiation on a given graph.

**Examples.**
The networks we wish to understand in this way include
straight line graphs consisting of $2$, $3$, or more nodes:

![nodes2]

![nodes3]

![nodes4]

![nodes5]

Or graphs containing triangles, like:

![triangle]

![triangle1]

## The Nash Bargaining Solution

In the simplest example of a $2$-node graph, two people, $A$ and $B$,
argue about how to split &euro;1 between them.  We further assume that
$A$ has an **outside option** of $x$ and $B$ has an **outside option** of
$y$.  This means that $A$ can decide to not split the euro with $B$
and take $x$ instead.  In the same way, $B$ can decide against a deal
with $A$ and take $y$ instead.  Presumably, $A$ and $B$ won't come to
an agreement over the splitting of the euro, if either of them has an
outside option that exceeds their proposed share of the euro.  As then
no agreement can be reached at all if $x + y > 1$, we assume that $x
+ y \leq 1$.

![nodes2out]

Then $A$ expects a share of at least $x$
and $B$ expects a share of at least $y$.
The negotiations then are over how to split the
**surplus** $s = 1 - (x + y)$.
Naturally one would expect them to split this in halves.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Nash Bargaining Solution.**
When $A$ and $B$ negotiate over splitting a euro,
with an outside option of $x$ for $A$ and an outside option
of $y$ for $B$ (such that $x + y \leq 1$),
the Nash bargaining outcome is

* $x + \frac12s = \frac12(x-y+1)$ to $A$, and
* $y + \frac12s = \frac12(y-x+1)$ to $B$.
</div>

It can be shown that this solution arises
naturally as an equilibrium, when the bargaining process
is studied as a game.

## Stability

An **outcome** of a network exchange consists of two things:

* A **matching** on the nodes, specifying who exchanges with whom.
Recall that a matching is a subset of the edges of the network that
involves each node at most once.  This matching is not necessarily
perfect.

* A **value** attached to each node, indicating
the node's payoff from the exchange.
The sum of values on two matched nodes this equals $1$,
whereas the value of any unmatched node is $0$.

**Examples.**  The following examples of outcomes are
either stable or unstable:

![outcome31]

Here, $B$ would be willing to switch if $C$ offered more than the $\frac12$
which $B$ is currently getting.

![outcome32]

Here, $C$ can no longer make an offer that would be attractive for $B$.

![outcome41]

Here, $B$ and $C$ could improve their lot by
agreeing to split a euro between them.

![outcome42]

This is a stable outcome.

![outcome43]

This is a stable outcome.

Most networks allow a wide range of possible outcomes.
An outcome is considered **stable**
if no node $X$ can offer a node $Y$  a deal that makes both
$X$ and $Y$ better off.

We define an _instability_ in an outcome
as a situation where two nodes have the opportunity
and the incentive to disrupt the current outcome.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Instability.**
An **instability** in an outcome, consisting of
a matching and values for the nodes,
is a non-matching edge, joining nodes with values
$x$ and $y$ such that $x + y < 1$.
</div>

Note how the two nodes forming an instability
have the opportunity to disrupt, as they are connected by an edge.
And they have the incentive to disrupt, as the 1 euro on
their joining edge provides them with more combined value than
they currently have.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Stability.**
An outcome of a network exchange is **stable** if
it does not contain any instabilities.
</div>

Stable outcomes are those outcomes that one would expect to see in practice.

There are, however, networks that have no stable outcome at all,
for example the triangle network.

## Balance

The notion of balance refines the notion of stability:
when a network allows several stable outcomes,
only some will be balanced.  Balance makes use of
the earlier idea of the Nash bargaining solution.
Here, the outside options are provided by the
the other nodes in the network.

**Examples.**

![balance41]

The all-$\frac12$ outcome is not balanced,
as the values on matching edges do not represent
the Nash bargaining solution, if alternative
agreements are considered as outside options.

![balance42]

This outcome is balanced, as both matching edges
do represent Nash bargaining solutions with respect
to outside options provided by alternative arrangements.

![balance43]

Shifting the payoffs further to the more central nodes $B$ and $C$,
results in an unbalanced outcome.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Balanced Outcome.**
An outcome, consisting of
a matching an node values,
is **balanced** if, for each edge
in the matching, the values on its endpoints
represent the Nash bargaining solution
for those two nodes, relative to
outside options provided by 
the values on the other nodes
of the network.
</div>

Note that every balanced outcome is necessarily stable,
as no two nodes have an incentive to disrupt
the current outcome.

**Example.**

![stem]

A balanced outcome on the stem graph.

[Chapter 12] of the book contains a more detailed
discussion of network bargaining in practice and in theory.

[nodes2]: /images/nodes2.png
[nodes3]: /images/nodes3.png
[nodes4]: /images/nodes4.png
[nodes5]: /images/nodes5.png
[triangle]: /images/triangle.png
[triangle1]: /images/triangle1.png
[nodes2out]: /images/nodes2out.png
[outcome31]: /images/outcome31.png
[outcome32]: /images/outcome32.png
[outcome41]: /images/outcome41.png
[outcome42]: /images/outcome42.png
[outcome43]: /images/outcome43.png
[balance41]: /images/balance41.png
[balance42]: /images/balance42.png
[balance43]: /images/balance43.png
[stem]: /images/stem.png
[Chapter 12]: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/networks-book/networks-book-ch12.pdf
