---
title: The Matching Problem
---

# Markets

In this part of the course, we will see how the network structure
(studied in the Graphs part) and strategic interaction (studied in the
Games part) can be combined to represent more complex real world
aspects like, for example, markets.

A market is a space that provides opportunities for interactions
between buyers and sellers.  A network can be used to encode access
between buyers and sellers.

##  Bipartite Graphs and the Matching Problem

**Example.** For their final year projects, students need to be
matched up with project supervisors.  For simplicity, we assume that
there are as many supervisors as there are students.
Each student gets one supervisor and each supervisor gets one student.
To start the process of pairing up students with supervisors,
each student selects 4 preferred supervisors.  The project organizers
then strive to find a matching where each student gets assigned one of their
preferred supervisors.

This setup can be described as a __bipartite graph__, that is a graph
with vertex set $X \cup Y$, where $X$ is the set of students and $Y$
the set of supervisors, and each edge in the graph has one of its
endpoints in $X$ and the other endpoint in $Y$.

The problem then is to find a __perfect matching__, that is a subset
of the edges in the graph so that each node in $X \cup Y$ is involved
in exactly one edge.  (Of course this is only possible if the two sets
have the same size, $|X| = |Y|$.  A perfect matching in a bipartite
graph effectively describes an explicit bijection between $X$ and
$Y$.)
