---
title: Positive and Negative Links
---

## Graph Theory and Social Networks

Usually, links represent friendly relationships.
Here we discuss networks with edges labelled by $+$ and $-$,
where $+$ stands for friendly relationship, and $-$ for
antagonism.

# Structural Balance

This is an example of a **local condition** that has an effect on the
**global structure** of a network.

Suppose that the network in question is a **complete graph**,
with edges labelled $+$ or $-$, and study triadic closure under
these conditions.
The triangles in this network have one of four possible types:

* All three edges are labelled $+$: the nodes form a set of
mutual friends, a constellation that can be considered **stable**.

* One edge labelled $+$ and two edges labelled $-$:
the nodes represent two friends with a common enemy,
another constellation that is considered **stable**.

* Two edges labelled $+$ and one edge labelled $-$:
here one node has two friends that don't like each other,
an **unstable** constellation as there are incentives
to either resolve the conflict and all be friends with each other,
or to side with one friend against the other.

* All edges labelled $-$:  a set of mutual enemies is
considered **unstable**, as again there is an incentive
for two nodes to team up against the third.

On the basis of this classification, one can formulate the
following  **Structural Balance Property**.

<div class="note">
The edges between any 3 nodes are either all labelled $+$, or
exactly one is labelled $+$.
</div>

An example of a network that is balanced in this sense
is one where the node set consists of two parts, $X$ and $Y$, say,
such that all nodes within $X$ are mutual friends,
all nodes within $Y$ are mutual friends,
and there is mutual antagonism between the two sets.  In fact,
these are the only examples of balanced graphs.

<div class="note">
Balance Theorem (Harary 1953).
If a labelled complete graph is balanced then the nodes can be
divided into two groups, $X$ and $Y$ (possibly empty),
such that all links within $X$, and within $Y$, are labelled $+$,
and all links between a node in $X$ and a node in $Y$ are $-$.
</div>

**Proof.** Pick a node $A$.  Every other node will be either a friend
or an enemy of $A$.  Let $X$ be $A$ and all its friends,
and let $Y$ be all of $A$'s enemies.  Then clearly $\{X, Y\}$ forms
a partition of the node set.  It remains to show that

* any two nodes in $X$ are friends
(which they are as either one of the nodes is $A$ and the other is $A$'s friend
by the definition of $X$, or the two nodes are friends of $A$, making them
friends by structural balance),

* any tow nodes in $Y$ are friends (which they are, both having $A$ as their
enemy by the definition of $Y$ and hence being friends by structural balance),

* every node in $X$ is an enemy of every node in $Y$ (which they are,
as the node in $X$ is either $A$, and thus an enemy of every node in
$Y$ by the definition of $Y$, or the node in $X$ is a friend and the
node in $Y$ an enemy of $A$, making them enemies as structural balance
requires the third edge of a triangle with at least one positive and
one negative edge to be negative.

**Applications.** In international relations it is often natural to
assume that all nodes (nations, in this case) have an opinion ($+$ or
$-$) about one another.  Structural balance can (sometimes) provide an
explanation for the bahaviour of nations during international crises.

# Weaker Forms of Structural Balance

The notion of structural balance is somewhat extreme, and in applications
might not be present in its pure form.  There are several ways to soften
the requirements on structural balance.

In a complete graph, for example, one might require only a certain
proportion of the triangles to be balanced.

Alternatively, one can relax the condition that every possible edge
must be present, and study structural balance in non-complete networks.

Here, we briefly study the following **Weak Structural Balance Property**
on a complete graph:

<div class="note">
No three nodes have exactly two negative edges between them
(and one positive edge).
</div>

The techniques of the proof of Harary's Balance Theorem can be
adjusted to characterize weakly balanced networks as follows.

<div class="note">
Weak Balance Theorem.
If a complete labelled graph is weakly balanced, then
then the nodes can be partitioned into groups
$X_1, X_2, \dots, X_k$, so that any two nodes within a group
are friends, and any two nodes from different groups
are enemies.
</div>



