---
title: Nash Equilibrium
category: Game Theory
published: false
---

## A Game of Three Clients

There are games where no player has a dominant strategy.

**Example.**  Two companies want to make business with
one of three clients $A$, $B$, or $C$, under the following conditions.

* If the two companies approach the same client,
this client will give half of its business to each of them.

* Company 1 is too small to do business on their own,
if they approach a different client than company 2, their payoff will be 0.

* $A$ is a large client and will only do the business if
both companies approach them, where as $B$ and $C$ are prepared to
deal with company 2 alone.

* $A$'s big business has a value of 8, while $B$ and $C$ have
business worth 2.

All of this results in the following payoff matrix
(with rows corresponding to the options for company 1, and
columns to company 2).

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|c|}
& A & B & C \\\hline
A& 4,4 & 0,2 & 0,2\\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 & 0,2\\\hline
C& 0,0 & 0,2 & 1,1\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

In this game, neither company has a dominant strategy.
In fact, each strategy is a strict best response
to some strategy of the other company.

## The Nash Equilibrium

The following simple idea allows us to reason about games
that have no dominant strategy.

**Definition (Equilibrium).**
An action profile $a = (a_1, \dots, a_n) \in A$
is a **Nash Equilibrium** if, for each player $i \in N$,
their action $a_i$ is a best response to $a_{-i}$.

The idea here is that an action profile which is not
an equilibrium provides an incentive for
at least one player to move to a different strategy.

In the preceding example, $(A, A)$ is an equilibrium,
as for both players, strategy $A$ is a best response to
the opponent playing $A$. In fact it is the only equilibrium
in that game. The profile $(B, B)$ is not an equilibrium
as player 2's best response to player 1 playing $B$ is $C$,
and not $B$.

Assuming that non-equilibrium strategies will not by played by
rational agents, in the example both players will play $A$, the unique
equilibrium of this game.

## Multiple Equilibria: Coordination Games

The analysis of a game can be difficult if it has multiple
equilibria.  This typically happens with situations that require
the players to coordinite.

**Example.**  Two students need to prepare a presentation
for the next day.  Unfortunately, they forgot to agree
on the software to use, and for now cannot communicate.
The options are either PowerPoint or BeamerLaTeX.
The presentation will be good if both students
use the same software in their preparation (payoff 1)
and it will be bad if different systems are usd (payoff 0).
This yields a payoff matrix of the following shape.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This game obviously has two equilibria, $(P,P)$ and $(B,B)$,
which cannot be distinguished from each other.

Interestingly, the same payoff matrix can be used to model the
question: Which side of the road should to oncoming cars use to pass
each other safely? This question is usually answered by social
conventions, conventions that everyone agrees with, but whcih could be
different from country to country.

Variants of the coordination game are not that symmetric.

**Example.**  If both students generally prefer BeamerLaTeX
for their presentations, and yield better results,
the payoff for both choosing this software might be 2 for both.
This results in an unbalanced payoff matrix.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 2,2 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Again, this game has two equilibria, but the higher payoff for the
$(B, B)$ is not captured by the equilibrium concept.

**Example (Battle of the Sexes).** A different lack of symmtry is
displayed by a game, which in the literature is called the 'Battle of
the Sexes'.  This game describes a situation where, for example,
a couple want to go to the cinema, and they need to agree on which
film to watch, considering that he would rather see and
action movie, and she usually prefers a romantic drama ...

Assuming a payoff of 0 for not seeing the same film,
a payoff of 2 for watching the preferred movie,
and a payoff of 1 for watching what the partner prefers, one
gets a payoff matrix as follows (with
rows corresponding to her options and
columns corresponding to his):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

## No Equilibrium: Attack-Defense Games

At the other end of the spectrum, there are games that have no
equilibrium at all.  This typically happens if the player's interests
are in direct conflict.  For example, if one player is an attacker and
has a choice of two different _attacking_ strategies, $A$ or $B$, and
the other player can choose _defend_ against either $A$ or $B$.  The
defender wins if they choose the same (matching) strategy as the
attacker.  Otherwise, in case of a mismatch the attacker attack
successfully and wins.

**Example (Matching Pennies).**
Here, the two player have a penny each, and both _choose_ theirs to
either show heads or tails.  Both pennies are revealed at the same time
and if they show different sides, player 1 (the attacker) wins and gets
to keep both pennies. If they match player 2 (the defender) wins and gets
to keep both pennies.  In terms of a payoff matrix this looks as follows
(with rows corresponding to player 1, and columns to player 2):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& H & T \\\hline
H& -1,+1 & +1,-1 \\\hline
T& +1,-1 & -1,+1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This (zero sum) game clearly has no domonant strategies, and no
equilibrium.

In reality, the players of such a game would make it difficult to guess their
strategies by choosing _randomly_.

Suppose that player 2 chooses $H$ with a certain probability $q \in [0, 1]$
(and hence $T$ with probability $1-q$).
The payoffs for player 1 are then determined as follows.

If player 1 chooses $H$, they will get a payoff of $-1$ with
probability $q$, and a payoff of $1$ with probability $(1-q)$.  In
total, this yields a payoff of $(-1)q + (1)(1-q) = 1 -2q$, depending
on the parameter $q$ chosen by player 2.  Similarly, if player 1
chooses $T$ they will receive a payoff of $(1)q + (-1)(1-q) = 2q-1$.

If one of $1-2q$ and $2q - 1$ was strictly bigger than the
other, the rational player 1 would have a strict preference
for exactly one of their options.

However, player 2's intention was it to choose the parameter $q$
so that player 1 becomes _indifferent_ between the available options.
The best bet for player 2 thus is to choose $q$ so that
the two payoff values for player 1 become the same:
$1 - 2q = 2q - 1$, that is $q = \frac12$.

For similar reasons, the optimal strategy for player 1 is
to choose $H$ wit probability $p = \frac12$.  Then
in the _strategy_ profile $(p, q)$, the choices,
$p$ by player 1 anr $q$ by player 2,
are again best responses to each other,
and the profile forms an equilibrium of
_mixed strategies_, to be discussed next.

**Reference.**  A brief account on the relevance of the notion of Nash Equilibrium and its historical context can be found in the
[May 2016] issue of the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.

[May 2016]: http://www.ams.org/publications/journals/notices/201605/rnoti-p526.pdf