---
title: "Distance and Breadth First Search"
category: Graphs and Social Networks
---

## Breadth First Search

The **length** of a path in a network is the number of edges it
contains, that is the number of steps that have to be taken to get
from its first to its last node.
In many applications this property
can serve as a measure of cost, or time,
associated to a path.
The **distance** between two nodes in a graph
is the length of the *shortest* path between them.
For example, the distance between nodes UCLA and LINC in the
Internet 1970 graph is 4, although to believe this
you first have to convince yourself that there is no path
of a shorter length between them.  For large and complex networks,
it can be difficult to determine distances between nodes by
just looking at the diagram.

A systematical way for the investigation of all paths in a graph is
given by the following _algorithm_, which we first describe in its most
basic form.  For this purpose, we call a node $x$ a **friend** of  a node $y$
if $x$ and $y$ are connected by an edge.
Then each node $x$ has a set of **friends**, the set of all
nodes $y$ that are joined to $x$ by an edge.

**Breadth First Search.** This algorithm takes as its **input** a
(simple, finite) graph $G = (X, E)$ and a vertex $x_0 \in X$, and it
produces as its **output** the connected component of $x_0$ in $G$
(together with additional information if recorded).

1. [initialize.] **mark** all nodes as _unseen_ and initialize a _queue_ $Q \gets (x_0)$.

2. [loop.] while $Q \neq \emptyset$: **pop** a vertex $x$ off $Q$, **mark**
$x$ as *seen* and **push** all unseen friends of $x$ onto $Q$.

3. [return.] return the set of _seen_ nodes as the connected component of $x_0$.

**Example.** If applied to the Internet 1970 graph $G$, with MIT as as
the chosen vertex $x_0$, the BFS algorithm first finds and marks MIT
(of course), then UTAH, BBN, and LINC as the friends of the first node
in the queue, then SRI, SDC, RAND, HARV, and CASE, and finally UCSB
STAN UCLA, and CARN.  This shows that no node on this network is
further than 3 steps away form MIT.  It is an instructive exercise, to
run through this application of the algorithm by hand, keeping track
of the changing membership of the queue, and to draw the resulting diagram.

In practice, BFS processes the nodes in the connected component of the selected node $x_0$ in **layers**, starting with $x_0$ as the only node in layer 0.
Layer 1 is then made from of the friends of $x_0$,
layer 2 from the friends of the friends of $x_0$ (that is, only those
who did not already appear as friends of $x_0$),
layer 3 from the friends of the friends of the friends of $x_0$,
and so on, until all nodes of this connected component have been exhausted.
Obviously the distance between $x_0$ and an arbitrary node $x$ is determined
by the layer containing $x$: If $x$ is in layer $n$, the algorithm exhibits an
explicit path of length $n$ from $x_0$ to $x$;
and there cannot be any shorter path between $x_0$ and $x$
as otherwise the node $x$ would have shown up in an earlier layer.

The edges used in the explicit shortest paths which
are exhibited by the algorithm form a _subgraph_ of the original graph $G$,
a so-called **spanning tree** of the connected component.
Here, _spanning_ means that the node set consists of all nodes in that
connected component, and _tree_ means that the resulting graph is
_connected_ and _acyclic_ (free from cycles).

Clearly, the basic BFS algorithm can be extended in such a way that
the distance from $x_0$ and the edges of the spanning tree
can be recorded when a node $x$ is marked _seen_.

