---
title: Strong vs Weak Ties
---

## Graph Theory and Social Networks

# Strong and Weak Ties

In many examples it is possible to distinguish between different
levels of _strength_ of the links of a network.  Here, we are going to
study networks with (only) two types of edges: **strong ties**
(corresponding to close friends, say), and **weak ties**
(corresponding to acquaintances).

The assumption that triadic closure is more likely to happen in the
presence of strong links can be formalized as the following
**Strong Triadic Closure Property**.

<div class="note">
    A node A violates the Strong Triadic Closure Property
    if it has strong ties with two other nodes B and C, and there
    is no edge at all between B and C.  A node A satisfies the
    Strong Triadic Closure Property if it does not violate it.
</div>

Example ...

Triadic closure establishes a connection between the local notion
of link strength and the structural notion of local brigdes, as follows.

**Claim.** If a node A in a network satisfies the Strong Triadic
Closure Property and is involved in at least two strong ties, then any
local bridge it is involved in must be a weak tie.

In other words, assuming that all nodes in a network satisfy the
Strong Triadic Closure Property and have sufficiently many strong
ties, local bridges are necessarily weak ties.

**Proof.** Suppose that node A does satisfy the Strong Triadic Closure
Property and is involved in at least two strong ties.  For a
contradiction, suppose the edge AB is a local bridge _and_ a strong
tie.  As AB is a local bridge, nodes A and B have no friends in
common.  Let AC be another strong tie involving A.  Then the Strong
Triadic Closure Property requires the existence of an edge BC, making
C a common friend of A and B, contradiction.

Simplyfying assumptions (like the Strong Triadic Closure Property) are
useful when they lead to statements that are robust in practice, in
the sense that qualitative conclusions still hold in approximate
forms, even when the assumptions are slightly relaxed.

The surprising strength of weak ties
(as experienced in the case of information leading to a new job
or other new opportunities
typically coming from distant acquaintances)
can be partially explained in this framework.
Links connecting people to new sources of
information tend to be local bridges of
a certain "span", which by the above are necessarily
weak ties.  The Stanford sociologist Mark Granovetter
has pioneered the theoretical study of social networks along such lines
in the 1970s.

Today, digital communication networks allow for empirical verifications
of theoretical predictions.

The **Twitter** network, for example, has its users as **nodes**, and
one can use its social network features to distinguish strong and weak
ties.  A _weak_ tie corresponds to one user _following_ another.  A
_strong_ tie corresponds to at least two messages directly addressed
at another user user.  An empirical study of the social network with
its strong and weak ties defined in this way, shows that people have
vastly different numbers of followees (between none and more than
1000), and the number of strong ties tends to increase with the number
of followees.  However, as soon as the nuber of followees reaches 400,
the number of strong ties seems to stabilize at around 50.
It requires little effort to "follow" a large number of
Twitter users.
But it requires time and energy to maintain a strong tie relationship,
and there are only so many hours in a day ...

