---
title: Mixed Strategies
---

## Game Theory

# Mixing

We now allow randomization in the choice of strategies.
In addition to _pure strategies_ $a_i \in A_i$,  this introduces
_mixed strategies_.

A **mixed strategy** for player $i \in N$ is a
probability distribution over the action set $A_i$, that is, a function $s_i \colon A_i \to [0, 1]$, such 
that $\sum_{a_i \in A_i} s_i(a_i) = 1$.

In games with mixed strategies, the finite action sets $A_i$ are
replaced by the infinite sets of strategies $S_i = \{ s_i: A_i \to [0,
1] \}$.

A collection $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S = S_1 \times \dots \times S_n$
is called a **strategy profile**.

For each player $i \in N$,  there is an **expected utility** $u_i \colon S \to \mathbb{R}$, defined as

$$
u_i(s) = \sum_{a \in A} u_i(a)\, \mathrm{Pr}(a | s),
$$

where

$$
\mathrm{Pr}(a | s) = \prod_{j \in N} s_j(a_j).
$$

We still say that, for player $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a **best response** to the strategy profile $s_{-i}$ of the other players, if
$u_i(s_i, s_{-i}) \geq u_i(s_i', s_{-i})$ for all $s_i' \in S_i$.

And we say that a profile $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S$ is a **Nash
equilibrium** if, for each $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a best
response to $s_{-i}$.

With mixed strategies the following award-winning result holds.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Theorem (Nash 1950).**   Every finite game has a Nash equilibrium.
</div>

# Computing Equilibria.

A game may have both pure-strategy and mixed-strategy equilibria.
In order to find all equilibria, one should therefore

* first check all the pure outcomes to see which, if any, form an equilibrium,

* then look for profiles of mixed strategies, i.e., probability
distributions over the action sets, which are mutual best responses.

In a $2$-player, $2$-strategy game this means to first check the $4$
cells of the $2 \times 2$ payoff matrix, ans then to look for mixing
probabilities $p$ and $q$ that make the corresponding mixed strategies
best responses to each other.  These probabilities can be computed under
the assumption that players will choose them in such a way
that their opponent's expected outcomes are the same for their two options.
This gives one equation per player, to be solved for $p$ and $q$.
If both values thus obtained lie strictly between $0$ and $1$, 
they determine a mixed-strategy equilibrium.

**Example (Battle of the Sexes.)**  In this game, with payoff matrix

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

we have already identified two pure-strategy equilibria: $(A, A)$ and $(R, R)$.

Suppose now that player 1 (the row player) uses a mixed stratey, where she chooses $A$ with probabilty $p$ (and $R$ with probability $1-p$).
Then the expected payoff for player 2 is 
$2p + 0(1-p)$ if he chooses $A$, and $0p + 1(1-p)$ if he chooses $R$.
So player 1 will pick $p$ so that $2p = 1 - p$, i.e., $p = \frac13$.

Similarly, suppose that player 2 chooses $A$ with probability $q$ (and $R$ with probability $1-q$).  Then the expected payoff for player 1 is
$1q + 0(1-q)$ if she chooses $A$, and $0q + 2(1-q)$ if she chooses
$R$.  Player 2 will thus pick $q$ with $2 = 2 - q$, that is $q = \frac23$.

# Global Optimality.

As we have seen, rational agents, acting in their own interest,
can produce outcomes which are less than optimal on a global scale,
as exemplified by the Prisoner's Dilemma.

Several concepts for measuring what's "good for society", from a
neutral or global perspective, have been suggested.  Here, we briefly
mention 'Pareto optimality' and 'Social Optimality'.  Both concepts
apply to the exam-or-presentation game, we have studied before, with
payoff matrix:

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & E \\\hline
P&90,90 & 86,92\\\hline
E&92,86 & 88,88\\\hline
\end{array}
$$


**Pareto Optimality.** A strategy profile $a \in A$ is
**Pareto-optimal**, if there is no other strategy profile $a' \in A$,
where all players receive playoffs at least as high, that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') \geq u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for all $i \in N$, and at least one player receives a
strictly higher payoff,
that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') > u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for (at least) one $i \in N$.


Pareto optimality is named after the Italian economist Vilfredo
[Pareto] (1848-1923). 

If players choose a strategy profile that is not Pareto
optimal, then there exists an alternative strategy profile, where at
least one player is better off, and no player fares worse.
However, if this alternative is not an equilibrium, at least one
player would then want to switch to a different strategy, and thus
present a risk to any agreement, the players might have to choose
a Pareto optimum.

The strategy $(E, E)$ in the exam-or-presentation example is not
Pareto-optimal, whereas $(P, P)$ is.
In the absence of a binding agreement, each individual player will
prefer to switch to the 'exam' strategy.  Note that the strategies
$(E, P)$ and $(P, E)$ are also Pareto-optimal,
as there is no alternative strategy profile that makes everybody's
payoff at least as good.  In this example, and in the Prisoner's Dilemma,
the unique Nash equilibrium is the only outcome that is not Pareto-optimal!

Social optimality is an even stronger condition that is simpler to state.

**Social Optimality.** A strategy profile $a \in A$
is **socially optimal** (or a **social welfare optimizer**)
if it maximizes $\sum_{i \in N} u_i(a)$, the sum of the players' payoffs.

Note that a socially optimal outcome is necessarily Pareto-optimal.

In the exam-or-presentation game, strategy $(P, P)$ with
a combined payoff of $90 + 90 = 180$ is the unique social optimum.
However, the combined payoffs of all the players might not always
be a meaningful measure of a game's outcome.

[pareto]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vilfredo_Pareto
