---
title: Equilibria in Strategic Games
category: Game Theory
published: false
---

So far, we have been discussing the **structure** of interconnecting links.
Now we are going to look at the interdependence in **behavior** of agents.

## Strategic Games

Strategic games are used to model and analyse situations where the outcome of a person's
decisions depend also on choices made by people they interact with.
This includes, for example, the question of how to defend against a
penalty kick in a soccer match, the pricing of a new product in a
competitive market, how to bid at an auction, or how to choose a route
through a transportation network.  Games have also been applied as
models in evolutionary biology.

The players involved in a strategic game are regarded as selfish
agents, only interested in maximizing their own payoff.
Some of the central questions in strategic game theory are:
When is selfish behavior essentially benign?  How do selfish players
reach an equilibrium (and do they)?

A game has the following ingredients.

1. Players (these are the decision makers)
2. Action (strategies, one set of options for each player)
3. Payoffs (to be maximized)

On this basis, one has the following formal definition.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Definition.**
A __finite $n$-person normal form game__ is a triple $(N, A, u)$, where

* $N = \\{1, 2, \dots, n\\}$ is a (finite) set of $n$ __players__,

* $A = A_1 \times A_2 \times \dots \times A_n$,
and $A_i$, for $i \in N$, is the finite set of __actions__ for player $i$
(we call $a = (a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n) \in A$ an __action profile__),

* $u = (u_1, u_2, \dots, u_n)$ is a __profile of utility functions__,
and $u_i \colon A \to \mathbb{R}$
is the __utility function__ (payoff) for player $i$.
</div>

For $n = 2$, there is a _standard matrix representation_ of a $2$-player game
by a matrix whose

* rows correspond to the actions $a_1 \in A_1$,
* columns correspond to the actions $a_2 \in A_2$,
* cells contain the payoffs $u_1(a_1, a_2)$ and $u_2(a_1, a_2)$.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.** Two students have both an exam and a joint presentation on the next day.
Each student only has time to prepare for one, the exam, or the joint presentation.
The outcomes can be predicted as follows. On the exam,
each student will score $92\%$ if prepared, and $80\\%$ if not.
For the presentation, they will score $100\%$ if both prepare for it,
$92\%$ if only one prepares for it, and $84\%$ if none prepares for it.

On average then, if both prepare for the presentation (and not for the
exam), they both score $\frac12(100+80) = 90$.  If both prepare for
the exam (and not for the presentation), they both score $\frac12(92 +
84) = 88$. And if student $1$ prepares the presentation, and student $2$
studies for the exam, then, on average, student $1$ will score
$\frac12(92 + 80) = 86$ and student $2$ will score $\frac12(92 + 92) =
92$.  Similar if student $1$ studies for the exam and student $2$ prepares
the presentation.  These outcomes (payoffs) can be summarized in a matrix,
where the rows correspond to student $1$'s options
($P$: prepare presentation, $E$: prepare for the exam),
and the columns correspond to student $2$'s options:

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & E \\\hline
P&90,90 & 86,92\\\hline
E&92,86 & 88,88\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

</div>

The game can now be analyzed under the following **assumptions**.

* The utility functions include everything the players care about
(so that, e.g., their partner's score would be accounted for
if they did care),
* complete information: the payoff matrix is known to all players,
* rationality: each player aims at maximizing their payoff,
and they know how to find an optimal strategy.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (cont'd).** If player $2$ plays $P$, then player $1$ maximizes
their payoff by playing $E$ (as $92 > 90$). If player $2$ plays $E$, then
player $1$ maximizes their payoff again by playing $E$ (as $88 > 86$).  So
regardless of what action player $2$ is choosing, player $1$ will yield a
higher payoff if they choose option $E$.  For the same reason, option $E$
is preferable for player $2$.

So both players most likely will opt for $E$, yielding
a payoff of $88$, despite the fact that there is
an action profile (both opting for $P$) that would yield
a higher payoff for both of them.
</div>

This game is an example
of a situation, which in game theory is known as the Prisoner's Dilemma.

**Prisoner's Dilemma.**  A prisoner's dilemma is a $2$-player game, where
each player has two options, $C$ and $D$, with payoffs as in the matrix

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& C & D \\\hline
C&a,a & b,c\\\hline
D&c,b & d,d\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

where $c > a > d > b$.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Concepts.**
In a game $(N, A, u)$, for $i \in N$,
it will be convenient to write $A_{-i}$ for
$A_1 \times \dots \times A_{i-1} \times A_{i+1} \times \dots A_n$,
the product of all sets $A_j$ but $A_i$,
and $a_{-i}$ for $(a_1, \dots, a_{i-1}, a_{i+1}, \dots, a_n)$.

An action $a_i \in A_i$ is a __best response__ to $a_{-i} \in A_{-i}$
if $u_i(a_i, a_{-i}) \geq u_i(a_i', a_{-i})$ for all $a_i' \in A_i$,
and it is a _strict best response_ to $a_{-i} \in A_{-i}$
if $u_i(a_i, a_{-i}) > u_i(a_i', a_{-i})$ for all $a_i' \neq a_i$.

An action $a_i \in A_i$ is a __(strictly) dominant strategy__ for player
$i \in N$, if it is a (strict) best response to each $a_{-i} \in
A_{-i}$.
</div>

In a Prisoner's Dilemma, each player has a strictly dominant strategy.
A rational agent will always play a dominant strategy, if they have one.

Even if only one player in a $2$-player game has a dominant strategy,
it is still possible to analyze the game, as in the following example.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.** There are two companies, C1 and C2, planning to introduce
a new product into a market that is cleanly divided into a low-price
segment and an upscale segment.  Each company has two options, as to
whether their product will be low-priced ($L$) or upscale ($U$).  The
sales are predicted on the basis of the following two assumptions.

* The low-priced segment accounts for 60% of the population,
the upscale segment for the other 40%.
* Company 1, being the more popular of the two will attract 80% of the
sales in case of direct competition, leaving only 20% to company 2.

This leads to the following payoff matrix (with rows corresponding to
the options for company 1, and columns to company 2):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& L & U \\\hline
L&48,12 & 60,40\\\hline
U&40,60 & 32,8\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Here, strategy $L$ is a strictly dominant strategy for company 1, which
they will play as a rational agent.  Consequently, company 2 will
play strategy $U$, as it is more profitable for them in this case.
</div>

## A Game of Three Clients

There are games where no player has a dominant strategy.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  Two companies want to make business with
one of three clients $A$, $B$, or $C$, under the following conditions.

* If the two companies approach the same client,
this client will give half of its business to each of them.

* Company 1 is too small to do business on their own,
if they approach a different client than company 2, their payoff will be 0.
* $A$ is a large client and will only do the business if
both companies approach them, where as $B$ and $C$ are prepared to
deal with company 2 alone.
* $A$'s big business has a value of 8, while $B$ and $C$ have
business worth 2.

All of this results in the following payoff matrix
(with rows corresponding to the options for company 1, and
columns to company 2).

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|c|}
& A & B & C \\\hline
A& 4,4 & 0,2 & 0,2\\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 & 0,2\\\hline
C& 0,0 & 0,2 & 1,1\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

In this game, neither company has a dominant strategy.
In fact, each strategy is a strict best response
to some strategy of the other company.
</div>

## The Nash Equilibrium

The following simple idea allows us to reason about games
that have no dominant strategy.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Definition (Equilibrium).**
An action profile $a = (a_1, \dots, a_n) \in A$
is a **Nash Equilibrium** if, for each player $i \in N$,
their action $a_i$ is a best response to $a_{-i}$.
</div>

The idea here is that an action profile which is not
an equilibrium provides an incentive for
at least one player to move to a different strategy.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
In the preceding example, $(A, A)$ is an equilibrium,
as for both players, strategy $A$ is a best response to
the opponent playing $A$. In fact it is the only equilibrium
in that game. The profile $(B, B)$ is not an equilibrium
as player 2's best response to player 1 playing $B$ is $C$,
and not $B$.
</div>

Assuming that non-equilibrium strategies will not by played by
rational agents, in the example both players will play $A$, the unique
equilibrium of this game.

## Multiple Equilibria: Coordination Games

The analysis of a game can be difficult if it has multiple
equilibria.  This typically happens with situations that require
the players to coordinate.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  Two students need to prepare a presentation
for the next day.  Unfortunately, they forgot to agree
on the software to use, and for now cannot communicate.
The options are either PowerPoint or BeamerLaTeX.
The presentation will be good if both students
use the same software in their preparation (payoff 1)
and it will be bad if different systems are used (payoff 0).
This yields a payoff matrix of the following shape.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This game obviously has two equilibria, $(P,P)$ and $(B,B)$,
which cannot be distinguished from each other.
</div>

Interestingly, the same payoff matrix can be used to model the
question: Which side of the road should to oncoming cars use to pass
each other safely? This question is usually answered by social
conventions, conventions that everyone agrees with, but which could be
different from country to country.

Variants of the coordination game are not that symmetric.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  If both students generally prefer BeamerLaTeX
for their presentations, and yield better results,
the payoff for both choosing this software might be 2 for both.
This results in an unbalanced payoff matrix.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 2,2 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Again, this game has two equilibria, but the higher payoff for the
$(B, B)$ profile is not captured by the equilibrium concept.
</div>

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Battle of the Sexes).** A different lack of symmetry is
displayed by a game, which in the literature is called the 'Battle of
the Sexes'.  This game describes a situation where, for example,
a couple want to go to the cinema, and they need to agree on which
film to watch, considering that he would rather see and
action movie, and she usually prefers a romantic drama ...

Assuming a payoff of 0 for not seeing the same film,
a payoff of 2 for watching the preferred movie,
and a payoff of 1 for watching what the partner prefers, one
gets a payoff matrix as follows (with
rows corresponding to her options and
columns corresponding to his):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

</div>


## References

A brief account on the relevance of the notion of Nash
Equilibrium and its historical context can be found in the [May 2016]
issue of the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.


<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2d_dtTZQyUM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In one scene of the movie 'A Beautiful Mind', the Nash character
gets an opportunity to apply the concept of a Nash equilibrium to
a real world situation, and thereby explain the concept to his mates.
This explanation, however, is flawed.  How?

[May 2016]: http://www.ams.org/publications/journals/notices/201605/rnoti-p526.pdf
