---
title: Mixed Strategies, Global Optimality
category: Game Theory
published: true
---

There are games that have no (pure) equilibrium at all.  This
typically happens if the player's interests are in direct conflict.
This motivates the introduction of mixed (randomized) strategies.

## Attack-Defense Games

For example, if one player is an attacker and
has a choice of two different _attacking_ strategies, $A$ or $B$, and
the other player can choose to _defend_ against either $A$ or $B$.  The
defender wins if they choose the same (matching) strategy as the
attacker.  Otherwise, in case of a mismatch, the attacker attacks
successfully and wins.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Matching Pennies).**
Here, the two player have a penny each, and both _choose_ theirs to
either show heads or tails.  Both pennies are revealed at the same time
and if they show different sides, player $1$ (the attacker) wins and gets
to keep both pennies. If they match player $2$ (the defender) wins and gets
to keep both pennies.  In terms of a payoff matrix this looks as follows
(with rows corresponding to player $1$, and columns to player $2$):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& H & T \\\hline
H& -1,+1 & +1,-1 \\\hline
T& +1,-1 & -1,+1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This (zero sum) game clearly has no dominant strategies, and no
equilibrium.
</div>

In reality, the players of such a game would make it difficult to guess their
strategies by choosing _randomly_.

<div class ="example" markdown="1">
Suppose that player $2$ chooses $H$ with a certain probability $q \in [0, 1]$
(and hence $T$ with probability $1-q$).
The payoffs for player $1$ are then determined as follows.

If player $1$ chooses $H$, they will get a payoff of $-1$ with
probability $q$, and a payoff of $1$ with probability $(1-q)$.  In
total, this yields a payoff of $(-1)q + (1)(1-q) = 1 -2q$, depending
on the parameter $q$ chosen by player $2$.  Similarly, if player $1$
chooses $T$ they will receive a payoff of $(1)q + (-1)(1-q) = 2q-1$.

If one of $1-2q$ and $2q - 1$ was strictly bigger than the
other, the rational player $1$ would have a strict preference
for exactly one of their options.

However, player $2$'s intention was it to choose the parameter $q$
so that player $1$ becomes _indifferent_ between the available options.
The best bet for player $2$ thus is to choose $q$ so that
the two payoff values for player $1$ become the same:
$1 - 2q = 2q - 1$, that is $q = \frac12$.

For similar reasons, the optimal strategy for player $1$ is
to choose $H$ with probability $p = \frac12$.  Then
in the _strategy_ profile $(p, q)$, the choices,
$p$ by player $1$ and $q$ by player $2$,
are again best responses to each other,
and the profile forms an equilibrium of
_mixed strategies_, to be discussed next.
</div>

## Mixing

We now allow randomization in the choice of strategies.
In addition to _pure strategies_ $a_i \in A_i$,  this introduces
_mixed strategies_.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
A **mixed strategy** for player $i \in N$ is a
probability distribution over the action set $A_i$, that is, a function $s_i \colon A_i \to [0, 1]$, such
that $\sum_{a_i \in A_i} s_i(a_i) = 1$.

In games with mixed strategies, the finite action sets $A_i$ are
replaced by the infinite sets of strategies $S_i = \\{ s_i: A_i \to [0,
1] \\}$.

A collection $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S = S_1 \times \dots \times S_n$
is called a **strategy profile**.

For each player $i \in N$,  there is an **expected utility** $u_i \colon S \to \mathbb{R}$, defined as

$$
u_i(s) = \sum_{a \in A} u_i(a)\, \mathrm{Pr}(a | s),
$$

where

$$
\mathrm{Pr}(a | s) = \prod_{j \in N} s_j(a_j).
$$

</div>

It is still possible to talk about best responses
and equilibria in the presence of mixed strategies.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
We still say that, for player $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a **best response** to the strategy profile $s_{-i}$ of the other players, if
$u_i(s_i, s_{-i}) \geq u_i(s_i', s_{-i})$ for all $s_i' \in S_i$.

And we say that a profile $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S$ is a **Nash
equilibrium** if, for each $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a best
response to $s_{-i}$.
</div>

With mixed strategies the following award-winning result holds.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Theorem (Nash 1950).**  If mixed strategies are allowed then every
finite game has a Nash equilibrium.
</div>

The proof of this theorem relies on Brouwer's [fixed point theorem]
and will be omitted.

## Computing Equilibria.

A game may have both pure-strategy and mixed-strategy equilibria.
In order to find all equilibria, one should therefore:

* first check all the pure outcomes to see which, if any, form an equilibrium,

* then look for profiles of mixed strategies, i.e., probability
distributions over the action sets, which are mutual best responses.

In a $2$-player, $2$-strategy game this means to first check the $4$
cells of the $2 \times 2$ payoff matrix, and then to look for mixing
probabilities $p$ and $q$ that make the corresponding mixed strategies
best responses to each other.  These probabilities can be computed under
the assumption that players will choose them in such a way
that their opponent's expected outcomes are the same for their two options.
This gives one equation per player, to be solved for $p$ and $q$.
If both values thus obtained lie strictly between $0$ and $1$,
they determine a mixed-strategy equilibrium.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Battle of the Sexes.)**  In this game, with payoff matrix

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

we have already identified two pure-strategy equilibria: $(A, A)$ and $(R, R)$.

Suppose now that player $1$ (the row player) uses a mixed strategy,
where she chooses $A$ with probability $p$ (and $R$ with probability $1-p$).
Then the expected payoff for player $2$ is
$2p + 0(1-p)$ if he chooses $A$, and $0p + 1(1-p)$ if he chooses $R$.
So player $1$ will pick $p$ so that $2p = 1 - p$, i.e., $p = \frac13$.

Similarly, suppose that player $2$ chooses $A$ with probability $q$ (and $R$ with probability $1-q$).
Then the expected payoff for player $1$ is
$1q + 0(1-q)$ if she chooses $A$, and $0q + 2(1-q)$ if she chooses
$R$.  Player $2$ will thus pick $q$ with $2 = 2 - q$, that is $q = \frac23$.
</div>

## Global Optimality.

As we have seen, rational agents, acting in their own interest,
can produce outcomes which are less than optimal on a global scale,
as exemplified by the Prisoner's Dilemma.

Several concepts for measuring what's "good for society", from a
neutral or global perspective, have been suggested.  Here, we briefly
discuss 'Pareto optimality' and 'Social Optimality'.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
Both concepts
apply to the exam-or-presentation game, we have studied before, with
payoff matrix:

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & E \\\hline
P&90,90 & 86,92\\\hline
E&92,86 & 88,88\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

</div>

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Pareto Optimality.**
A strategy profile $a \in A$ is
**Pareto-optimal**, if there is no other strategy profile $a' \in A$,
where all players receive playoffs at least as high, that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') \geq u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for all $i \in N$, and at least one player receives a
strictly higher payoff,
that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') > u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for (at least) one $i \in N$.
</div>

Pareto optimality is named after the Italian economist Vilfredo
[Pareto] (1848-1923).

If players choose a strategy profile that is not Pareto
optimal, then there exists an alternative strategy profile, where at
least one player is better off, and no player fares worse.
However, if this alternative is not an equilibrium, at least one
player would then want to switch to a different strategy, and thus
present a risk to any agreement the players might have to choose
a Pareto optimum.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
The strategy $(E, E)$ in the exam-or-presentation example is not
Pareto-optimal, whereas $(P, P)$ is.
In the absence of a binding agreement, each individual player will
prefer to switch to the 'exam' strategy.  Note that the strategies
$(E, P)$ and $(P, E)$ are also Pareto-optimal,
as there is no alternative strategy profile that makes everybody's
payoff at least as good.
</div>

In this example, as in each Prisoner's Dilemma,
the unique Nash equilibrium is the only outcome that is not Pareto-optimal!

Social optimality is an even stronger condition that is simpler to state.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Social Optimality.** A strategy profile $a \in A$
is **socially optimal** (or a **social welfare optimizer**)
if it maximizes $\sum_{i \in N} u_i(a)$, the sum of the players' payoffs.
</div>

Note that a socially optimal outcome is necessarily Pareto-optimal.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
In the exam-or-presentation game, strategy $(P, P)$ with
a combined payoff of $90 + 90 = 180$ is the unique social optimum.
</div>

However, the combined payoffs of all the players might not always
be a meaningful measure of a game's outcome.

[pareto]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vilfredo_Pareto
[fixed point theorem]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brouwer_fixed-point_theorem
