---
title: Structure of the Web
category: The Web
published: false
---

So far, the networks that have been discussed most of the time
consisted of people or organizations, connected by links representing
opportunities for interactions.   The World Wide Web is an example
of a network of a different kind, a so-called **information network**.

##  Information Networks

Information networks connect pieces of information,
like documents, or parts of documents, through links
that represent references of some kind.  Such links,
in contrast to social relationships which are typically symmetric,
only point in one direction.
The underlying graph of an information network thus
is a **directed graph**.

Information networks have existed before the internet.  Some prominent
examples include:

* **Academic Publications.**  In the scientific literature it is customary
to give credit to sources that have been used in the form of
references to those publications that contain those sources.
This practice creates a network whose nodes are the
publications, and whose links represent the references, pointing from
the citing article back to the cited article.
A large part of this network in the mathematical literature is
captured on [MathSciNet].

* **Mathematical Proofs.**  In mathematics, the proof of a particular theorem
usually relies on theorems that have already been proved.
Citing a theorem in a proof thus creates a link from the theorem
being proved back to the theorem being used, in a network of mathematical
theorems.  In a similar way, a complex computer program,
consisting of several subroutines, can be regarded
as a network of subroutines, pointing to each other through links
that arise from one subroutine calling another.

* **Technical Documentation.** The documentation of complex systems,
such as computer software, typically consists of a collection of
articles (manual pages), each describing one aspect of the system,
frequently using cross-references to each other.  Here the network
consists of the manual pages, and the links represent those cross
references.  In a similar way, an encyclopedia (or a dictionary)
organizes its content as a sequence of articles, sorted
alphabetically, with supporting cross-references.

##  Hypertext

The **World Wide Web** arose out of the desire to make technical
documentation more easily accessible by using the internet.
It was conceived by [Tim Berners-Lee] around 1990
as information management system at [CERN].

In this system, documents are **web pages**, that anyone can create
and store in a publicly accessible place on their computer.  Moreover,
it supplies a **web browser**, a piece of software that can retrieve
the web pages from those public spaces, allowing others to easily
access those documents.

Web pages contain **hypertext**, that is text and **hyperlinks** (or
just links).  Here, a hyperlink is a reference to another document
that the reader can follow by clicking.  Hyperlinks have a **source**
(the document they are contained in) and a **target** (the document
they reference).

This creates a network of documents as nodes
and hyperlinks as directed edges between them.

There are many other ways to organize information: alphabetically
(like the telephone book),
hierarchical (in folders like the files on a computer), ...
Certainly, the physical constraints of the environment
(like the fact that books need to be stored on shelves,
that pages in a book come in order)
have an influence on how well a particular solution works.

Hypertext makes logical relationships
within and between texts (which traditionally are only implicit)
explicit first class objects.
The browser makes links immediately actionable.

Hypertext originates from the works of the visionaries
[Vannevar Bush] (the Memex, 1945) and
[Ted Nelson] (Xanadu Project, 1965).

It will be useful to distinguish between **navigational links**
(providing access to related pages)
and **transactional links** (which exist more
for a side effect, like ordering a book,
or sending an email, than
for the sake of leading to the next page).
The distinction is not always clear,
but transactional links are the kind that is of
little interest for search engines.
It's the navigational links that
form the edges of the directed graph
that turns the Web into
an information network.

As with undirected graphs, an interesting question in
directed graphs is: which nodes can be reached from
a given node?

##  Reachability in Directed Graphs

A **directed graph** is a pair $G = (X, E)$
with **vertex set** $X$  and **edge set** $E \subseteq X^2 = X \times X$.
For an edge $(x, y) \in E$ we sometimes write $x \to y$.

A **path** in a directed graph  $G = (X, E)$
is a sequence of nodes $(x_0, x_1, \dots, x_l)$
with $x_{i-1} \to x_i$ for $i = 1,\dots, l$.
The number $l$ is called the **length** of the path.
We write $x \leadsto y$
if there exists a path (possibly of length $0$)
from $x$ to $y$ in $G$.

A directed graph $G$ is **strongly connected** if, for
each pair of vertices $x, y \in X$, there is a path from
$x$ to $y$ in $G$, i.e., if $x \leadsto y$.

A **strongly connected component (SCC)** of a directed graph $G$
is a subset $C$ of $X$ which is (i) strongly connected,
and (ii) not part of a larger strongly connected subset of $X$.


When a directed graph $G$ is regarded as a relation
on the set $X$
(as in the [note on graphs]), strongly connected components can be described as
the equivalence classes of an equivalence relation that is obtained
as follows.

First note that the relation ${x \leadsto y}$
is the reflexive and transitive closure of the
edge relation $x \to y$.  Thus, by construction it is reflexive and
transitive.  It might not be anti-symmetric, though,
meaning that there might be vertices $x$ and $y$
with $x\leadsto y$ and $y 
\leadsto x$.

However, the new relation $x \equiv y$,
defined as $x \leadsto y$ and $y \leadsto x$
is an equivalence relation (why?)
and its equivalence classes are the strongly connected
components of $G$.  Denote the class of $x \in X$ by $[x]$.

Moreover, there is a partial order relation
$\leq$ (a relation which is reflexive, transitive and anti-symmetric)
on the set of equivalence classes,
$[x] \leq [y]$ if $x \leadsto
y$.

**Example.**  The following diagram represents a set of
linked web pages.

![web]

Strongly connected components share the same color.  Note how the
components are  partially ordered by the paths between them:
between any two components, there is either no path at all,
or all the paths travel in the same direction.

## The Bow-Tie Structure.

Like the giant component in a simple graph,
a directed graph with sufficiently many edges
has  a giant strongly connected component SCC.

The remainder of the graph consists of four more sets of components of nodes.

1. IN: upstream components, the set of all components
$C$ with $C <$ SCC.

2. OUT: downstream components,
the set of all components $C$ with $C >$ SCC.

3. tendrils: the set of all components $C$ with either $C >$ IN and $C \not<$ OUT
or $C <$ OUT and $C \not>$ IN; <BR />
and tubes: components $C$ with $C >$ IN, $C <$ OUT but $C \not <$ SCC.

4. disconnected components.

Thus, any directed graph with a distinguished strongly connected component
necessarily has the following global bow-tie structure:

![bowtie]

**Example.**  The components of the (small) example above form
a bow-tie structure as in the following diagram.

![bowtie0]

Here, the giant SCC is the component `college` of the `NUIG` node.
The IN part consists of the components `student` and `applying`
(which each contain a single node only in the original network).
The component `lyrics` (again containing only a single node)
forms a tendril off the IN part.  And the OUT part
consists of the components `post` (consisting of the
node corresponding to the blog post about Company X)
and the component `company` (consisting of the pages
on the Company X web site).

Research on available data on the Web in 1999 has confirmed this
structure for the World Wide Web, with a large component SCC
covering less than $\frac13$ of the vertex set,
and the
three parts IN, OUT and the tendrils and tubes roughly of the same
size.  One can assume that this proportion has not changed much over
time, although the advent of social media
has brought many new types of links and
documents to the Web.


[MathSciNet]: http://www.ams.org/mathscinet
[Tim Berners-Lee]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Berners-Lee
[CERN]: http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html
[Vannevar Bush]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vannevar_Bush
[Ted Nelson]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ted_Nelson
[note on graphs]: {% post_url 2017-01-18-note03 %}
[web]: /images/web.png
[bowtie]: /images/bowtie.png
[bowtie0]: /images/bowtie0.png
