---
title: Market Clearing Prices Exist
category: Markets
published: true
---

In a market, buyers and sellers express preferences.
A  matching allocates buyers to sellers according to these preferences.
Here we will see how, under suitable circumstances,
a perfect matching can be achieved.  This illustrates how
valuations and prices can decentralize a market in such a way
that individuals, acting only in their own interests, can still
produce socially optimal outcomes.

## Valuations

Consider a variation of the earlier example of
the management of final year projects.

**Example.**  Assuming again that there are  as many supervisors as there are students,
each student, rather than selecting a subset of suitable supervisors,
rates each supervisor with a numerical score, as a measure for
the degree of happiness of such an assignment.

For example, if there are three supervisors, $A$, $B$, and $C$,
and three students, $X$, $Y$ and $Z$, and each student
has three valuations, one for each of the supervisors,
one can graphically illustrate one possible matching as follows.

![clearing1]

Here, student $X$ values supervisor $A$ at $12$, supervisor $B$ at $4$
and supervisor $C$ at $2$.

One can measure the **quality** of the matching
as the sum of the valuations on the edges that
from part of the matching: $12 + 5 + 5 = 23$.

An optimal assignment maximises total happiness, but
not necessarily individual happiness.

It is now natural to ask, how to find an optimal assignment.
This question is a generalization of the perfect matching problem.
(how?)

## Prices

As a further ingredient, we now add prices to the model.
In order to make the discussion more realistic we now switch
to a property market example.

Suppose there are $n$ sellers, selling $n$ houses to $n$ buyers.
As before, each buyer $j$  has a valuation $v_{ij} \in \mathbb{N} \cup \\{0\\}$
for each house $i$.

Moreover, each seller $i$ sets a price $p_i$ for their house.

**Payoffs.**
With these values in place, buyer $j$'s payoff is
$v_{ij} - p_i$, if she buys house $i$.
Hence, wishing to  maximise the payoff, she has an interest in dealing
with those sellers $i$
that maximise the quantity
$v_{ij} - p_i$.  This interest can
be described by a **preferred sellers graph**,
a bipartite graph, where each buyer is connected to
exactly those sellers that maximise the buyer's payoff.

**Examples.** In the following example,
seller $A$ has a price of $5$ for his house,
seller $B$ a price of $2$, and seller $C$ a
price of $0$.
The resulting preferred sellers graph is a
perfect matching.

![clearing2]

In the next example,
seller $A$ has a price of $2$ for his house,
seller $B$ a price of $1$, and seller $C$ a
price of $0$.
The resulting preferred sellers graph is a
bipartite graph with many edges that does not
contain a
perfect matching. (Why?)

![clearing3]

The final example is similar,
except that seller $A$ now has a price of
$3$ on his house, with the
effect that the resulting
preferred sellers graph is a
bipartite graph with a
perfect matching.

![clearing4]

Hence in this example, buyers and
sellers can be matched up in
such a way that each buyer maximises her
payoff.

## Market-Clearing Prices

A set of prices is called **market-clearing**, if the resulting
preferred seller graph has a perfect matching.

Maybe surprisingly, one can show that, for
any set of buyer valuations,
there exists a set of market clearing prices.

Before we turn to the proof of this claim
(in the form of an algorithm that actually constructs
a set of market clearing prices),
let us note that market-clearing prices
yield a socially optimal outcome.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Optimality of Market-Clearing Prices.** For any set of market-clearing
prices, a perfect matching in the resulting preferred-seller graph
has the maximum total valuation of any assignment of sellers to buyers.
</div>

This claim is justified as follows.  Clearly, any such perfect matching
has maximal total payoff, since the preferred-seller graph consists
only of edges that maximise an individual buyer's payoff.
Now the maximal total payoff is
just the difference of the
maximal total valuation
and the sum of all the prices.
But the sum of the prices does not depend on the
chosen perfect matching.

## Constructing Market Clearing Prices

We now provide an algorithmic proof the following claim.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Existence of Market-Clearing Prices.** For
any set of buyer valuations,
there exists a set of market clearing prices.
</div>

The procedure will be some kind of auction,
although now we are dealing with _many_ sellers, selling many items to _many_ buyers.
The auction works a s follows.

Initially, all sellers set their prices to zero: $p_i = 0$.
Buyers then choose the preferred sellers, and if the resulting
graph contains a perfect matching we are done.

If not, there is a constricted set, that is a set $S$ of buyers, with
the property that $|N(S)| < |S|$ (here $N(S)$ is the set of neighbours
of all nodes in $S$): the number $|N(S)|$ of sellers these buyers are
interested in is strictly smaller than the number $|S|$ of buyers.

In other words, those houses are in "high demand",
and consequently those sellers can increase their prices.
The aution continues with each seller in the set $N(S)$
raising their price by one unit.

It will be convenient to have the lowest price equal to $0$
throughout.  In order to ensure this, ath this stage
of the algorithm, all prices are adjusted  by subtracting
the smallest price (which might be $0$).

In summary,
starting with all prices being $0$,
the auction repeats the following sequence of steps
until a perfect matching is found.

1. Construct the preferred-seller graph on the
basis of the current prices

2. Stop if the graph contains a perfect matching.

3. Else find a constricted set $S$ of buyers, and their neighbours
$N(S)$.

4. All sellers in $N(S)$ simultaneously raise their prices by one
unit.

5. Modify all prices by subtracting the smallest price.

**Example.** The following graphs illustrate how the
algorithm works on the set of valuations we considered earlier.
Initially, with all prices $p_i = 0$, we get the following
preferred-seller graph.

![clearing7]

Clearly, this graph has a constricted set $S = \\{X, Y, Z\\}$,
and in the next step, the sole node in $N(S) = \\{A\\}$ raises
their price by one unit.  This results in a slightly modified
preferred-seller graph.

![clearing6]

In this graph, $S = \\{X, Y\\}$ forms a constricted
set with $N(S) = \\{A\\}$, so $A$ raises his price
by another unit, resulting in a new
preferred-seller graph.

![clearing5]

Here one can identify $S = \\{X, Y, Z\\}$ as
a constricted set with $N(S) = \\{A, B\\}$,
justifying further price increases,
and another
preferred-seller graph.

![clearing4]

At this point the algorithm stops:
the graph contains a perfect matching
(as we already knew).

**Termination.** To finish the proof, it remains to show that the procedure always comes to
an end, not only on the above example.

To that end, we introduce a notion of **potential energy**, as follows.
The potential energy of a buyer is their current maximal payoff.
The potential energy of a seller is their current price.
(Both buyers and sellers would receive these as payoff
if the prices were market-clearing.)
The potential energy of the auction then is the total
sum of the potential energies of all buyers and sellers.

Initially, as all prices are zero, the potential energy
equals the maximal total valuation.  Clearly, the potential
energy will never drop below zero
(as no buyer or seller will allow their potential energy
to become negative).

How does the potential energy of the auction change
over time, that is when the individual steps of
the algorithm are carried out?

Note that only steps 4 and 5 above
can have an impact on the potential energy,
as they are the only steps that affect the prices.

In step 5, subtracting a fixed amount $p$ from each price
will reduce each seller's payoff by $p$
and at the same time increase each buyer's payoff by $p$.
The net effect on the potential energy hence is $0$.

In set 4, however, the price increases add one unit to the payoff of
each of the sellers in the set $N(S)$, while they take away one unit
from the payoff of each buyer in the set $S$.  As $|S| > |N(S)|$, this
strictly decreases the potential energy.

Therefore the process has to come to an end after finitely many steps.
This concludes the proof of the claim that market-clearing prices exist.


[clearing1]: /images/clearing1.png
[clearing2]: /images/clearing2.png
[clearing3]: /images/clearing3.png
[clearing4]: /images/clearing4.png
[clearing5]: /images/clearing5.png
[clearing6]: /images/clearing6.png
[clearing7]: /images/clearing7.png
