---
title: Centrality Measures
category: Graphs and Social Networks
published: true
---

Key actors in a social network can be identified through centrality
measures.  The question of what it means to be central has a number of
different answers.  Accordingly, in the context of social network
analysis, a variety of different centrality measures have been developed.

Here we introduce, in addition to the **degree centrality** we have already
seen, three more further measures:

* **eigenvector centrality**, defined in terms of properties
of the network's adjacency matrix,

* **closeness centrality**, defined in terms of a nodes distance
to other nodes on the network,

* **betweenness centrality**, defined in terms of shortest paths.

For simplicity, we assume here that the network under consideration
is connected.

Recall, the **degree centrality** (or just the degree) $c_i^D$ of node $i$
in terms of the adjaceny matrix $A$ of the (undirected) network is

$$
c_i^D = \sum_j a_{ij}.
$$

## Eigenvector centrality

The centrality of a node is ($\lambda$-)proportional to the **sum** of the
centralities of its neighbours.

$$
\lambda c_i^E = \sum_j a_{ij} c_j^E
$$

That means, $A c^E = \lambda c^E$, making the vector $c^E = (c_i^E)$
an **eigenvector** for the **eigenvalue** $\lambda$ of the adjacency matrix
$A$.  But: which $\lambda$?  Given that an $n \times n$-matrix $A$
in general has $n$ (complex) eigenvalues.

Luckily, the adjacency matrix $A$ of a connected undirected network
is **irreducible**, i.e., under no permutation of its rows and columns
it has the shape

$$
\left(
\begin{array}{cc}
A_{11} & A_{12} \\
0 & A_{22}
\end{array}
\right),
$$
and we have the following theorem from Linear Algebra

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Theorem (Frobenius-Perron).** Ṡuppose that $A$ is a non-negative
irreducible $n \times n$-matrix, then

* one of its eigenvalues is positive and, in absolute value,
greater or equal to all other eigenvalues,

* this eigenvalue has multiplicity $1$ (as root of the characteristic polynomial of $A$)

* there is a positive eigenvector $u_1$ for this eigenvalue.
</div>

Define the **eigenvector centrality** $c_i^E$ of node $i$ as

$$
c_i^E = u_1, i.
$$

Example ...

##  Closeness Centrality

A node can be considered as important if it can quickly
interact with many nodes on the network.

We have seen that BFS can be used to determine for node $i$ the distances
$d_{ij}$ from nodes $j$ in the (connected) network.

Define the **closeness centrality** $c_i^C$  of node $i$ as

$$
c_i^C = (\sum_{j} d_{ij})^{-1},
$$

the reciprocal of the sum of the distances from $i$ to the other nodes.

(This measure can be normalized, using the fact that $(n-1) c_i^C$
is always a number between 0 and 1.

Example ...

##  Betweenness Centrality

In addition to distances, BFS finds shortest paths.
Assuming (for simplicity) that information travels (just)
along shortest paths, a nodes centrality can be determined
by the number (or proportion) of shortest paths it lies on.

Denote by $n_{jk}$ the number of shortest paths from
node $j$ to node $k$ (which can be larger than $1$),
and by $n_{jk}(i)$, the number of such paths
that **travel through node $i$**.

Define the **betweenness centrality** $c_i^B$ of node $i$
as

$$
c_i^B = \sum_{j,k} \frac{n_{jk}(i)}{n_{jk}}
$$

Example ...
