---
title: Equilibria and Global Optimality
category: Game Theory
published: true
---

Recall that, formally,
a finite $n$-person normal form game is a triple $(N, A, u)$, where

* $N = \\{1, 2, \dots, n\\}$ is a (finite) set of $n$ players,

* $A = A_1 \times A_2 \times \dots \times A_n$,
and $A_i$, for $i \in N$, is the finite set of actions for player $i$
(where $a = (a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n) \in A$ is called an action profile),

* $u = (u_1, u_2, \dots, u_n)$ is a profile of utility functions,
and $u_i \colon A \to \mathbb{R}$
is the utility function describing the payoff for player $i$.

Some, but not all games allow for dominant strategies for one
or more players.   A rational player will always choose a
dominant strategy.

In the absence of dominant strategies, other tools are needed to
analyse a game.

## A Game of Three Clients

There are games where no player has a dominant strategy.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  Two companies want to make business with
one of three clients $A$, $B$, or $C$, under the following conditions.

* If the two companies approach the same client,
this client will give half of its business to each of them.
* Company 1 is too small to do business on their own,
if they approach a different client than company 2, their payoff will be 0.
* $A$ is a large client and will only do the business if
both companies approach them, where as $B$ and $C$ are prepared to
deal with company 2 alone.
* $A$'s big business has a value of 8, while $B$ and $C$ have
business worth 2.

All of this results in the following payoff matrix
(with rows corresponding to the options for company 1, and
columns to company 2).

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|c|}
& A & B & C \\\hline
A& 4,4 & 0,2 & 0,2\\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 & 0,2\\\hline
C& 0,0 & 0,2 & 1,1\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

In this game, neither company has a dominant strategy.
In fact, each strategy is a strict best response
to some strategy of the other company.
</div>

## The Nash Equilibrium

The following simple idea allows us to reason about games
that have no dominant strategy.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Definition (Equilibrium).**
An action profile $a = (a_1, \dots, a_n) \in A$
is a **Nash Equilibrium** if, for each player $i \in N$,
their action $a_i$ is a best response to $a_{-i}$.
</div>

The idea here is that an action profile which is not
an equilibrium provides an incentive for
at least one player to move to a different strategy.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
In the preceding example, $(A, A)$ is an equilibrium,
as for both players, strategy $A$ is a best response to
the opponent playing $A$. In fact it is the only equilibrium
in that game. The profile $(B, B)$ is not an equilibrium
as player 2's best response to player 1 playing $B$ is $C$,
and not $B$.
</div>

Assuming that non-equilibrium strategies will not by played by
rational agents, in the example both players will play $A$, the unique
equilibrium of this game.

## Multiple Equilibria: Coordination Games

The analysis of a game can be difficult if it has multiple
equilibria.  This typically happens with situations that require
the players to coordinate.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  Two students need to prepare a presentation
for the next day.  Unfortunately, they forgot to agree
on the software to use, and for now cannot communicate.
The options are either PowerPoint or BeamerLaTeX.
The presentation will be good if both students
use the same software in their preparation (payoff 1)
and it will be bad if different systems are used (payoff 0).
This yields a payoff matrix of the following shape.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 1,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This game obviously has two equilibria, $(P,P)$ and $(B,B)$,
which cannot be distinguished from each other.
</div>

Interestingly, the same payoff matrix can be used to model the
question: Which side of the road should to oncoming cars use to pass
each other safely? This question is usually answered by social
conventions, conventions that everyone agrees with, but which could be
different from country to country.

Variants of the coordination game are not that symmetric.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example.**  If both students generally prefer BeamerLaTeX
for their presentations, and yield better results,
the payoff for both choosing this software might be 2 for both.
This results in an unbalanced payoff matrix.

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & B \\\hline
P& 1,1 & 0,0 \\\hline
B& 0,0 & 2,2 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Again, this game has two equilibria, but the higher payoff for the
$(B, B)$ profile is not captured by the equilibrium concept.
</div>

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Battle of the Sexes).** A different lack of symmetry is
displayed by a game, which in the literature is called the 'Battle of
the Sexes'.  This game describes a situation where, for example,
a couple want to go to the cinema, and they need to agree on which
film to watch, considering that he would rather see an
action movie, and she usually prefers a romantic drama ...

Assuming a payoff of $0$ for not seeing the same film,
a payoff of $2$ for watching the preferred movie,
and a payoff of $1$ for watching what the partner prefers, one
gets a payoff matrix as follows (with
rows corresponding to her options and
columns corresponding to his):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Clearly, $(A, A)$ and $(R, R)$ are equilibria.  How the couple
decides which one to choose is not captured by the game.
</div>

## Attack-Defense Games

There are games that have no (pure) equilibrium at all.  This
typically happens if the player's interests are in direct conflict.
This motivates the introduction of mixed (randomized) strategies.

For example, if one player is an attacker and
has a choice of two different _attacking_ strategies, $A$ or $B$, and
the other player can choose to _defend_ against either $A$ or $B$.  The
defender wins if they choose the same (matching) strategy as the
attacker.  Otherwise, in case of a mismatch, the attacker attacks
successfully and wins.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Matching Pennies).**
Here, the two player have a penny each, and both _choose_ theirs to
either show heads or tails.  Both pennies are revealed at the same time
and if they show different sides, player $1$ (the attacker) wins and gets
to keep both pennies. If they match player $2$ (the defender) wins and gets
to keep both pennies.  In terms of a payoff matrix this looks as follows
(with rows corresponding to player $1$, and columns to player $2$):

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& H & T \\\hline
H& -1,+1 & +1,-1 \\\hline
T& +1,-1 & -1,+1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

This (zero sum) game clearly has no dominant strategies, and no
equilibrium.
</div>

In reality, the players of such a game would make it difficult to guess their
strategies by choosing _randomly_.

<div class ="example" markdown="1">
Suppose that player $2$ chooses $H$ with a certain probability $q \in [0, 1]$
(and hence $T$ with probability $1-q$).
The payoffs for player $1$ are then determined as follows.

If player $1$ chooses $H$, they will get a payoff of $-1$ with
probability $q$, and a payoff of $1$ with probability $(1-q)$.  In
total, this yields a payoff of $(-1)q + (1)(1-q) = 1 -2q$, depending
on the parameter $q$ chosen by player $2$.  Similarly, if player $1$
chooses $T$ they will receive a payoff of $(1)q + (-1)(1-q) = 2q-1$.

If one of $1-2q$ and $2q - 1$ was strictly bigger than the
other, the rational player $1$ would have a strict preference
for exactly one of their options.

However, player $2$'s intention was it to choose the parameter $q$
so that player $1$ becomes _indifferent_ between the available options.
The best bet for player $2$ thus is to choose $q$ so that
the two payoff values for player $1$ become the same:
$1 - 2q = 2q - 1$, that is $q = \frac12$.

For similar reasons, the optimal strategy for player $1$ is
to choose $H$ with probability $p = \frac12$.  Then
in the _strategy_ profile $(p, q)$, the choices,
$p$ by player $1$ and $q$ by player $2$,
are again best responses to each other,
and the profile forms an equilibrium of
_mixed strategies_, to be discussed next.
</div>

## Mixed Strategies

We now allow randomization in the choice of strategies.
In addition to _pure strategies_ $a_i \in A_i$,  this introduces
_mixed strategies_.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
A **mixed strategy** for player $i \in N$ is a
probability distribution over the action set $A_i$, that is, a function $s_i \colon A_i \to [0, 1]$, such
that $\sum_{a_i \in A_i} s_i(a_i) = 1$.

In games with mixed strategies, the finite action sets $A_i$ are
replaced by the infinite sets of strategies $S_i = \\{ s_i: A_i \to [0,
1] \\}$.

A collection $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S = S_1 \times \dots \times S_n$
is called a **strategy profile**.

For each player $i \in N$,  there is an **expected utility** $u_i \colon S \to \mathbb{R}$, defined as

$$
u_i(s) = \sum_{a \in A} u_i(a)\, \mathrm{Pr}(a | s),
$$

where

$$
\mathrm{Pr}(a | s) = \prod_{j \in N} s_j(a_j).
$$

</div>

It is still possible to talk about best responses
and equilibria in the presence of mixed strategies.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
We still say that, for player $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a **best response** to the strategy profile $s_{-i}$ of the other players, if
$u_i(s_i, s_{-i}) \geq u_i(s_i', s_{-i})$ for all $s_i' \in S_i$.

And we say that a profile $s = (s_1, \dots, s_n) \in S$ is a **Nash
equilibrium** if, for each $i \in N$, strategy $s_i$ is a best
response to $s_{-i}$.
</div>

With mixed strategies the following award-winning result holds.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Theorem (Nash 1950).**  If mixed strategies are allowed then every
finite game has a Nash equilibrium.
</div>

The proof of this theorem relies on Brouwer's [fixed point theorem]
and will be omitted.

## Computing Equilibria.

A game may have both pure-strategy and mixed-strategy equilibria.
In order to find all equilibria, one should therefore:

* first check all the pure outcomes to see which, if any, form an equilibrium,

* then look for profiles of mixed strategies, i.e., probability
distributions over the action sets, which are mutual best responses.

In a $2$-player, $2$-strategy game this means to first check the $4$
cells of the $2 \times 2$ payoff matrix, and then to look for mixing
probabilities $p$ and $q$ that make the corresponding mixed strategies
best responses to each other.  These probabilities can be computed under
the assumption that players will choose them in such a way
that their opponent's expected outcomes are the same for their two options.
This gives one equation per player, to be solved for $p$ and $q$.
If both values thus obtained lie strictly between $0$ and $1$,
they determine a mixed-strategy equilibrium.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
**Example (Battle of the Sexes.)**  In this game, with payoff matrix

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& A & R \\\hline
A& 1,2 & 0,0 \\\hline
R& 0,0 & 2,1 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

we have already identified two pure-strategy equilibria: $(A, A)$ and $(R, R)$.

Suppose now that player $1$ (the row player) uses a mixed strategy,
where she chooses $A$ with probability $p$ (and $R$ with probability $1-p$).
Then the expected payoff for player $2$ is
$2p + 0(1-p)$ if he chooses $A$, and $0p + 1(1-p)$ if he chooses $R$.
So player $1$ will pick $p$ so that $2p = 1 - p$, i.e., $p = \frac13$.

Similarly, suppose that player $2$ chooses $A$ with probability $q$ (and $R$ with probability $1-q$).
Then the expected payoff for player $1$ is
$1q + 0(1-q)$ if she chooses $A$, and $0q + 2(1-q)$ if she chooses
$R$.  Player $2$ will thus pick $q$ with $2 = 2 - q$, that is $q = \frac23$.
</div>

## Global Optimality.

As we have seen, rational agents, acting in their own interest,
can produce outcomes which are less than optimal on a global scale,
as exemplified by the Prisoner's Dilemma.

Several concepts for measuring what's "good for society", from a
neutral or global perspective, have been suggested.  Here, we briefly
discuss 'Pareto optimality' and 'Social Optimality'.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
Both concepts
apply to the exam-or-presentation game, we have studied before, with
payoff matrix:

$$
\begin{array}{r|c|c|}
& P & E \\\hline
P&90,90 & 86,92\\\hline
E&92,86 & 88,88\\\hline
\end{array}
$$

</div>

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Pareto Optimality.**
A strategy profile $a \in A$ is **not
Pareto-optimal**, if there is a strategy profile $a' \in A$,
such that all players receive payoffs at least as high, that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') \geq u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for all $i \in N$, and at least one player receives a
strictly higher payoff,
that is $u_i(a_i', a_{-i}') > u_i(a_i, a_{-i})$ for (at least) one $i \in N$.

A strategy profile $a \in A$ is **Pareto-optimal** if it is not not
Pareto-optimal.
</div>

Pareto optimality is named after the Italian economist Vilfredo
[Pareto] (1848-1923).

If players choose a strategy profile that is not Pareto
optimal, then there exists an alternative strategy profile, where at
least one player is better off, and no player fares worse.
However, if this alternative is not an equilibrium, at least one
player would then want to switch to a different strategy, and thus
present a risk to any agreement the players might have to choose
a Pareto optimum.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
The strategy $(E, E)$ in the exam-or-presentation example is not
Pareto-optimal, whereas $(P, P)$ is.
In the absence of a binding agreement, each individual player will
prefer to switch to the 'exam' strategy.  Note that the strategies
$(E, P)$ and $(P, E)$ are also Pareto-optimal,
as there is no alternative strategy profile that makes everybody's
payoff at least as good.
</div>

In this example, as in each Prisoner's Dilemma,
the unique Nash equilibrium is the only outcome that is not Pareto-optimal!

Social optimality is an even stronger condition that is simpler to state.

<div class="note" markdown="1">
**Social Optimality.** A strategy profile $a \in A$
is **socially optimal** (or a **social welfare optimizer**)
if it maximizes $\sum_{i \in N} u_i(a)$, the sum of the players' payoffs.
</div>

Note that a socially optimal outcome is necessarily Pareto-optimal.

<div class="example" markdown="1">
In the exam-or-presentation game, strategy $(P, P)$ with
a combined payoff of $90 + 90 = 180$ is the unique social optimum.
</div>

However, the combined payoffs of all the players might not always
be a meaningful measure of a game's outcome.

## References

A brief account on the relevance of the notion of Nash
Equilibrium and its historical context can be found in the [May 2016]
issue of the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2d_dtTZQyUM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In one scene of the movie 'A Beautiful Mind', the Nash character
gets an opportunity to apply the concept of a Nash equilibrium to
a real world situation, and thereby explain the concept to his mates.
This explanation, however, is flawed.  How?

[pareto]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vilfredo_Pareto
[fixed point theorem]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brouwer_fixed-point_theorem
[May 2016]: http://www.ams.org/publications/journals/notices/201605/rnoti-p526.pdf
